The Joe Rogan experience. So, uh, over the weekend I got into your book.
Woo.
Yes. Yes.
It's great. Thank you. I mean, I really appreciate someone like you,
who's trying to break down quantum mechanics and quantum physics for someone
like me,
it's very hard to follow and there was a lot of backing up and trying it again
and backing up and trying it again and like going over paragraphs and trying to
figure out exactly what it means. But, uh, it's,
it's really excellent and really perplexing at the same time.
Well, thank you. And you know,
there are different styles when it comes to writing popular books.
I think there should be different styles. And my particular style is, look,
it's not going to be a breezy page Turner. Uh,
but if you read it carefully, like there's not prerequisites,
you don't have to come into it as an expert. What do you have to come into?
It is someone who's willing to sit and think about every paragraph and then
hopefully it will be rewarding and you'll truly understand what's going on after
doing that.
Well, it is rewarding because it is fascinating.
And the history of quantum physics is also pretty fascinating because I've
always wondered,
like how did anybody even want to come up with this stuff like this?
And the fact that it was so long ago,
it was what the beginnings of it were in the 19th century.
Well, 1900 is the typical, literally that year,
the turn of the century when Alex plunk first, uh, got the first hints of it.
And then yeah, it was took another 27 years to put it into final shape.
Now for regular people that don't have a background of
physics or that don't,
this is like the whole idea behind it is so bizarre. It's like,
why would anybody try to figure out something
that one of the things that you said that's really interesting is that you,
quantum physics is used all the time.
It's used with exact calculations,
but yet we don't really understand it.
Yeah, yeah, no, that's the main message of the book really,
because physicists of course do quantum mechanics every day, whether it's,
you know, straightforward quantum mechanics, quantum field theory,
quantum information, quantum computing, clearly, we're pretty good at it.
You know, like transistors and lasers depend on quantum mechanics,
the sun shining, figuring that out,
depends on quantum mechanics that Higgs bows on, et cetera.
So to claim that we don't understand, quantum mechanics is a little bit weird,
but then we have quotes from people like Richard Fineman saying nobody
understands quantum mechanics, right? And so if he says that,
then there's some authority behind it.
And the reason is what we have is sort of a black box, right?
We say, you know what?
I think what I said in a New York times article I wrote recently is physicists
understand quantum mechanics in the same way that someone who owns a smartphone
understands the smartphone. Like they know how to use the apps.
They can call people, they can make phone calls, they can take pictures.
They don't know what's going on inside.
And that's physicists with quantum mechanics. They use it. They can make very,
very precise predictions. But if you ask them what is really going on,
like what is actually happening? What are all the details they're like, yeah,
no, that's not our job. Let's just stick to prediction.
So someone like me, that's so terrifying because like the,
the very nature of reality is being examined by people.
Like if, if it is us of smartphone,
it's being examined by people like me who don't really understand the
smartphone. I have no idea what what's going on inside a smartphone. I've know.
I know some words that you use to describe Ram and
process.
Trans moving around in there. Right. But, uh, yeah. And I think,
and in some sense that's fine.
Like most of us don't need to know what's going on inside the smartphone to use
it, but somebody should know. Right.
And my argument in the book is look the,
if 500 years from now,
when historians write the history of 20th century physics,
they will say two things. Uh, one is my God.
These people were so brilliant and creative to invent quantum mechanics.
And then they were so afraid to really take it
seriously and try to understand it. Like they said,
like stop asking questions about the meaning of reality and what the world is
doing in my mind,
what physics is all about is understanding reality and what the world is doing.
It's not just about making predictions, making predictions is good,
but we do that. Uh, you know,
mostly because we're curious about what the world is doing.
Well for people outside the world of academia.
When I read someone like you saying that you were discouraged
from pursuing this,
and you literally told that you should be pursuing your
work in cosmology and gravitation is that's where it's at. That's serious work.
Yeah. That, that seems to me is be so crazy. It's like,
if anybody should be pursuing it, it should be people like.
Yeah. I mean, I want to be fair.
So of course 20th century physics was incredibly successful and,
and there was part of the attitude was, look,
we have to understand nuclear physics and particle physics. And you know,
a lot of it was the center of physics shifted from Europe to the U S and Europe
is much more philosophical.
And you're willing to think about the deep ideas and Americans are pretty
pragmatic and want to build things right. In particular,
at the time they wanted to build nuclear weapons.
And so the idea of just really putting aside deep philosophical issues and
putting stuff to work was attractive. And, and the other issue is, you know,
okay, let's say we do demand that we understand quantum mechanics better.
How do you do it? Like,
what experiment is it there that you can do is as far as we know the cookbook
that we have, even though we don't understand, it works pretty well. Like what,
what could you type into your smartphone that would help you understand what's
going on inside? It's kind of hard to figure out.
So I think those attitudes were wrong, but at least, you know,
they're not completely crazy. It's not just that they, uh,
were afraid of the truth or anything like that.
And I also think that it is finally changing now. I think that there's slowly,
slowly,
slowly more people are appreciating the understanding quantum mechanics is
important. What.
Do you attribute that to?
Um, a couple of things. One is, I mean, there's good news and bad news.
That part of the good news is technology has gotten better.
So we're trying to build quantum computers, for example, and guess what,
you know,
some of the ad hoc rules that we had for doing quantum mechanics might not be up
to the task. We need to understand the details a little bit better. Um,
the other sad thing is that so much of fundamental physics is kind of
stuck right now, right? We haven't,
we literally have not been surprised by a new experimental result in
fundamental physics since the 1970s. Uh,
the one there's one exception to that,
which is the universe accelerating in 1998, which was the dark energy. Um,
we've had amazing accomplishments in experimental and observational
physics. We've found the expos on. We found the top quark.
We found gravitational waves, the microwave background, many, many things,
but they were all predicted decades ago. Right?
So progress is driven by being surprised.
And it's been a long time since we've been surprised.
So some people including myself say, well,
one of the things to do in that situation is to take a step back and reexamined
the foundations. Maybe,
maybe we can take a broader look and think that we were walking down the wrong
path.
Now for people that don't have any background in physics,
there there's a bit of an issue with the public perception.
And one of the things about public perception is films.
Like what the bleep yeah.
That sort of throw this sort of cultish monkey wrench into the,
you know,
w quantum physics is weird enough as it is without adding,
let that movie was literally created by a channeler, right?
Uh, David Albert, who is one of the leading philosophers of physics.
And I should also give credit to philosophers here because they haven't taken
quantum mechanics seriously longer than the physicists have to be honest. Um,
so David is one of many people who got a PhD in physics and then switched to
philosophy because he cared about the foundations of quantum mechanics and no
physics department would ever hire him. Right. It's hilarious. And, uh, yeah.
I tell the story went through the back door. Yeah. I tell the story in the book,
like he wrote a bunch of influential papers as a graduate student,
and then he went and said, uh, I would like to, you know, make these papers,
my PhD thesis. And they said, no, that's not really serious physics.
And they punished him by making him write this incredibly technical mathematical
paper on quantum field theory, just to prove he could do it.
And then he's like this, I, I don't want to take this anymore.
I'm switching fields. But anyway, he was in that film,
he was in what the bleep and they lied to him.
They misrepresented themselves. They said,
we're doing a documentary about quantum mechanics.
And they sat him down for three hours and asked him all these questions.
You're leading questions. Like,
doesn't this mean that we're bringing reality into existence by looking at it?
And he's like, no, not what it means. Let me explain to you.
But then in the final film, there's like 32nd clips of him going, yes,
that is a really important question. Right.
But like completely misrepresenting what he said.
And so he went public after that and, uh, and complained about,
and about the film. And he did in a hilarious story.
There was a, uh, event,
some sort of convention put on in Santa Monica by supporters of the film
that they thought it would be fun to get all of the people who were in the
movie, what the bleep do we know and get them, you know,
and talk to them and charge people money to listen to them.
But these people were not affiliated with the filmmakers.
So they didn't know the David Albert had been completely misrepresented in the
film.
So they invited him and he goes to this event in Santa Monica and he gave a
talk. You know, he, he decided, you know, he wondered like,
should I just go at all, but okay, why not? Let's reach a different audience.
And he, he gave a talk and he said, look,
there's two things you can do when you are faced with fundamental puzzles of
reality. One is you can face up to what the world is trying to tell you,
and you can accept it and take it as what it is. No matter what you like.
The other is, you can choose to tell a flattering story about yourself.
And the people who made this movie have decided that the mysteries of quantum
mechanics are really stories about how they are powerful and have influence over
reality and so forth. But it's all nonsense.
And the punchline is the audience loved it.
They went nuts because what they wanted was a guru of some sort. And like,
he was just as good as good as anybody else. So, you know,
he had a better story to tell reality-based guilty guru. Yeah. Yeah.
So I think you're right. I mean,
I think that quantum mechanics I've said before is, um,
of all the theories in the history of science,
the most easily distorted and misrepresented in the popular mind.